doc(v1.10.0): note for v1beta2 CRD manually migration (#1211)
longhorn/website: content/docs/1.10.1/important-notes/_index.md

This page summarizes the key notes for Longhorn v{{< current-version >}}.
For the full release note, see [here](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/releases/tag/v{{< current-version >}}).

- [Warning](#warning)
  - [Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn To v1.10.x](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110)

>   - [Troubleshoot CRD Migration Failure After Upgrading Longhorn v1.10.x](#troubleshoot-crd-migration-failure-after-upgrading-longhorn-v110)

Reviewer: `Warning` might be better because it highlights the importance of the issue.
How about 

```
## Warning
#### Upgrade
....
```

    - [V2 Data Engine Replica Rebuild QoS](#v2-data-engine-replica-rebuild-qos)
    - [V2 Data Engine Volume Expansion](#v2-data-engine-volume-expansion)

## Warning

> 

Reviewer: In general, the flow can be

- Mention what the upgrade from v1.8.x to v1.9.x does. 
- However, the v1beta1 leftovers might exist because some reasons....
- How to check and the steps before upgrading to v1.10.x

> While the upgrade process typically migrates resources automatically to the new `v1beta2` version, there are scenarios, such as backup system interruptions during the upgrade where some Custom Resource (CR) objects may remain in the deprecated `v1beta1` format.

Reviewer: `While the upgrade process...`
Need to mention the upgrade is from v1.8.x to v1.9.x

If these CRs are not fully migrated to `v1beta2`, the Longhorn Manager may fail to operate correctly. A common error message indicating this issue looks like:

```
Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
```

### Recommended Action

> After upgrading Longhorn, verify that all `*.longhorn.io` CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs) have been fully migrated to `v1beta2`. This ensures system stability and avoids runtime errors.

Reviewer: Same as above. `After upgrading Longhorn` is confusing. Need to mention from which version to which one.

Reviewer: BTW, the description is a bit weird. If the upgrade to v1.10.x succeeds, the following operations are not required.

Author: Seems that CRD storedVersion cleanup is required. Added some notes in the warning section.

systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

If any CRD still lists `"v1beta1"` in `status.storedVersions`, you will need to perform a manual CRD storage version migration to remove the deprecated version and avoid upgrade issues.

```bash
kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator \
  --type=merge \
  -p "$(kubectl get validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator -o json | \
  jq '.webhooks[0].rules |= map(if .apiGroups == ["longhorn.io"] and .resources == ["settings"] then
    .operations |= map(select(. != "UPDATE")) else . end)')"

migration_time="$(date +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S)"
crds=($(kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.storedVersions | index("v1beta1")) | .metadata.name'))
for crd in "${crds[@]}"; do
  echo "Migrating ${crd} ..."
  for name in $(kubectl -n longhorn-system get "$crd" -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do
    kubectl patch "${crd}" "${name}" -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"migration-time":"'"${migration_time}"'"}}}'
  done
done

> 

Reviewer: @COLDTURNIP 
One step that remove v1beta1 storedversion is missing.

kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator \
  --type=merge \
  -p "$(kubectl get validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator -o json | \
  jq '.webhooks[0].rules |= map(if .apiGroups == ["longhorn.io"] and .resources == ["settings"] then
    .operations |= (. + ["UPDATE"] | unique) else . end)')"

> ```

Reviewer: Add comments for each command.

    - [V2 Data Engine Replica Rebuild QoS](#v2-data-engine-replica-rebuild-qos)
    - [V2 Data Engine Volume Expansion](#v2-data-engine-volume-expansion)

## Warning

> While the Longhorn v1.8.x to v1.9.x upgrade process typically migrates resources automatically to the new `v1beta2` version, it is required to perform manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10.x, to ensure that all the Longhorn custom resources are migrated to `v1beta2`, and to remove the legacy `v1beta1` from the CRD stored version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Longhorn v1.8.x to v1.9.x upgrade process typically migrates resources automatically to the new v1beta2 version, it is recommended to perform manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10.x. This is because certain operations such as etcd restore or CRD restore may cause legacy v1beta1 data to remain, and a manual migration ensures that all Longhorn custom resources are properly migrated to `v1beta2`.

In addition, it is required to remove the `v1beta1` from the CRD stored version to complete the migration.
```

backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimagemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupbackingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backuptargets.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupvolumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engineimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engines.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
instancemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
nodes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
orphans.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
recurringjobs.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

All CRDs should contains only `"v1beta2"` before v1.10.x upgrade.

With these steps completed, the Longhorn CRD upgrade process should now proceed without issues.

### Troubleshoot CRD Migration Failure After Upgrading Longhorn v1.10.x

> If these CRs are not fully migrated to `v1beta2`, the Longhorn Manager may fail to operate correctly. A common error message indicating this issue looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not apply the above pre-upgrade steps and the CRs are not fully migrated to `v1beta2`, the longhorn-manager Pods may fail to operate correctly. A common error message for this issue is:
```

```
Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
```

> To fix this issue, it require force downgrade Longhorn to original v1.9.x version. If the Longhorn is installed using `kubectl`, it is required to patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrade:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix this issue, it requires a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version. If the Longhorn is installed using `kubectl`, it is required to patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrade:
```

```bash
# attaching annotation to allow patching current-longhorn-version
kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"longhorn.io/update-setting-from-longhorn":""}}}'
# temporarily override current version to allow old version installation

> kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"value":"v1.9.0"}'

Reviewer: 1.9.0?

```

After modified `current-longhorn-version`, install the original v1.9.x Longhorn version.

To Helm chart installation, downgrade is allowed with [`preUpgradeChecker.upgradeVersionCheck`](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/tree/v1.9.x/chart#other-settings) disabled.

> The Longhorn system is not fully downgraded with these steps. The major functions are not workable at this moment, for example, the volume scheduling. The only operational action avaiable is to [migrate the CRDs manually](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), then upgrade to v1.10.x.

Reviewer: After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage where major functions, such as volume scheduling, are not operational. The purpose of this stage is solely to migrate the legacy v1beta1 CRs to `v1beta2`. The only supported action at this point is to [manually migrate the CRDs](https://github.com/longhorn/website/pull/1211/files#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x)
 and then proceed with the upgrade to v1.10.x.

    - [V2 Data Engine Replica Rebuild QoS](#v2-data-engine-replica-rebuild-qos)
    - [V2 Data Engine Volume Expansion](#v2-data-engine-volume-expansion)

## Warning

> While the Longhorn v1.8.x to v1.9.x upgrade process typically migrates resources automatically to the new `v1beta2` version, it is recommended to perform manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10.x. This is because certain operations such as etcd restore or CRD restore may cause legacy `v1beta1` data to remain, and a manual migration ensures that all Longhorn custom resources are properly migrated to `v1beta2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Longhorn v1.8 to v1.9 upgrade process migrates resources automatically to the new `v1beta2` version, it is recommended to perform manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10.x. This is because certain operations such as etcd restore or CRD restore may cause `v1beta1` data to remain, and a manual migration ensures that all Longhorn custom resources are properly migrated to `v1beta2`.
```

> In addition, it is required to remove the `v1beta1` from the CRD stored version to complete the migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, it is required to remove `v1beta1` from the CRD stored versions to complete the migration and ensure that the upgrade to Longhorn v1.10 succeeds.
```

For more details, see [Kubernetes official document for CRD storage version](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/#upgrade-existing-objects-to-a-new-stored-version).

> ### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn To v1.10.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn to v1.10
```

> After Longhorn v1.9.x is installed, before upgrading to v1.10.x, perform the following manual CRD storage version migration script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before upgrading from Longhorn v1.9 to v1.10, perform the following manual CRD storage version migration:
```

```bash
# Temporarily disable the CR validation webhook to allow updating read-only settings CRs.
kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator \
  --type=merge \
  -p "$(kubectl get validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator -o json | \
  jq '.webhooks[0].rules |= map(if .apiGroups == ["longhorn.io"] and .resources == ["settings"] then
    .operations |= map(select(. != "UPDATE")) else . end)')"

# Migrate CRDs that ever stored v1beta1 resources
migration_time="$(date +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S)"
crds=($(kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o json | jq -r '.items[] | select(.status.storedVersions | index("v1beta1")) | .metadata.name'))
for crd in "${crds[@]}"; do
  echo "Migrating ${crd} ..."
  for name in $(kubectl -n longhorn-system get "$crd" -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do
    # Attach additional annotations to trigger v1beta1 resource updating in the latest storage version.
    kubectl patch "${crd}" "${name}" -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"migration-time":"'"${migration_time}"'"}}}'
  done
  # Clean up the stored version in CRD status

>   kubectl patch crd "${crd}" --type=merge -p '{"status":{"storedVersions":["v1beta2"]}}' --subresource=status

Reviewer 2: Are all operations, including resource migration from beta1 to beta2) and the removal of beta1 resources from stored versions, synchronous? I want to confirm that concurrency is not a concern.

    .operations |= (. + ["UPDATE"] | unique) else . end)')"
```

Then you can check the CRD stored versions using:

```bash
kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{": "}{.status.storedVersions}{"\n"}{end}'

backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimagemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupbackingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backuptargets.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupvolumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engineimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engines.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
instancemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
nodes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
orphans.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
recurringjobs.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

All CRDs should contains only `"v1beta2"` before v1.10.x upgrade.

> With these steps completed, the Longhorn CRD upgrade process should now proceed without issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these steps completed, the Longhorn upgrade to v1.10 should now proceed without issues.
```

### Troubleshoot CRD Migration Failure After Upgrading Longhorn v1.10.x

If you do not apply the above pre-upgrade steps and the CRs are not fully migrated to `v1beta2`, the longhorn-manager Pods may fail to operate correctly. A common error message for this issue is:

```
Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
```

> To fix this issue, it requires a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version. If the Longhorn is installed using `kubectl`, it is required to patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrade. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To fix this issue, it requires a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version due to the failed upgrade. If the Longhorn is installed using `kubectl`, it is required to patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrade. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:
```

> To fix this issue, it requires a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version due to the failed upgrade. If the Longhorn is installed using `kubectl`, it is required to patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrade. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix this issue, you need to perform a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version, which is the version that was running in your cluster before the failed upgrade. If Longhorn was installed using `kubectl`, you must patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrading. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:
```

```bash
# attaching annotation to allow patching current-longhorn-version
kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"longhorn.io/update-setting-from-longhorn":""}}}'
# temporarily override current version to allow old version installation
kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"value":"v1.9.1"}'
```

After modified `current-longhorn-version`, install the original v1.9.x Longhorn version.

To Helm chart installation, downgrade is allowed with [`preUpgradeChecker.upgradeVersionCheck`](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/tree/v1.9.x/chart#other-settings) disabled.

> After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage. This stage exists solely to migrate legacy v1beta1 CRs to v1beta2, as described in [manually migrate the CRDs](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), before proceeding with the upgrade to v1.10.x. You can follow the steps outlined in that guide during this stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage. This stage exists solely to migrate `v1beta1` CRs to `v1beta2`, as described in [manually migrate the CRDs](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), before proceeding with the upgrade to v1.10.x. You can follow the steps outlined in that guide during this stage.
```

> After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage. This stage exists solely to migrate `v1beta1` CRs to `v1beta2`, as described in [manually migrate the CRDs](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), before proceeding with the upgrade to v1.10.x. You can follow the steps outlined in that guide during this stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage. This stage exists solely to migrate `v1beta1` CRs to `v1beta2`, as described in [manually migrate the CRDs](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), before proceeding with the upgrade to Longhorn v1.10. You can follow the steps outlined in that guide during this stage.
```

> After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage where major functions, such as volume scheduling, are not operational. The purpose of this stage is solely to migrate the legacy `v1beta1` CRs to `v1beta2`. The only supported action at this point is to [manually migrate the CRDs](#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x) and then proceed with the upgrade to v1.10.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the downgrade, the Longhorn system enters an intermediate stage. This stage exists solely to migrate legacy v1beta1 CRs to v1beta2, as described in [manually migrate the CRDs](https://github.com/longhorn/website/pull/1211/files#recommended-action-before-upgrading-longhorn-to-v110x), before proceeding with the upgrade to v1.10.x. You can follow the steps outlined in that guide during this stage.
```

    - [V2 Data Engine Replica Rebuild QoS](#v2-data-engine-replica-rebuild-qos)
    - [V2 Data Engine Volume Expansion](#v2-data-engine-volume-expansion)

> ## Upgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Warning
```

> While the Longhorn v1.8 to v1.9 upgrade process migrates resources automatically to the new `v1beta2` version, it is recommended to perform manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10.x. This is because certain operations such as etcd restore or CRD restore may cause `v1beta1` data to remain, and a manual migration ensures that all Longhorn custom resources are properly migrated to `v1beta2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Longhorn v1.8 to v1.9 upgrade process migrates all Longhorn custom resources (CRs) automatically to the`v1beta2`, we recommend performing a manual CRD storage version migration before upgrading Longhorn to v1.10. This is because certain operations such as etcd restore or CRD restore may cause `v1beta1` data to remain, and a manual migration ensures that all Longhorn CRs are properly migrated to `v1beta2`.
```

In addition, it is required to remove `v1beta1` from the CRD stored versions to complete the migration and ensure that the upgrade to Longhorn v1.10 succeeds.

For more details, see [Kubernetes official document for CRD storage version](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definition-versioning/#upgrade-existing-objects-to-a-new-stored-version).

> ### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn To v1.10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn to v1.10
```

> ### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn To v1.10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended Action Before Upgrading Longhorn to v1.10
```

for crd in "${crds[@]}"; do
  echo "Migrating ${crd} ..."
  for name in $(kubectl -n longhorn-system get "$crd" -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do
    # Attach additional annotations to trigger v1beta1 resource updating in the latest storage version.
    kubectl patch "${crd}" "${name}" -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"migration-time":"'"${migration_time}"'"}}}'
  done
  # Clean up the stored version in CRD status
  kubectl patch crd "${crd}" --type=merge -p '{"status":{"storedVersions":["v1beta2"]}}' --subresource=status
done

# Re-enable the CR validation webhook.
kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator \
  --type=merge \
  -p "$(kubectl get validatingwebhookconfiguration longhorn-webhook-validator -o json | \
  jq '.webhooks[0].rules |= map(if .apiGroups == ["longhorn.io"] and .resources == ["settings"] then
    .operations |= (. + ["UPDATE"] | unique) else . end)')"
```

Then you can check the CRD stored versions using:

```bash
kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{": "}{.status.storedVersions}{"\n"}{end}'
```

> All CRDs should contains only `"v1beta2"` before v1.10.x upgrade. Here is the expected example output:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All CRDs should contains only `"v1beta2"` before upgrading to v1.10.x. Example output:
```

replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

With these steps completed, the Longhorn upgrade to v1.10 should now proceed without issues.

### Troubleshooting CRD Upgrade Failures During Upgrade to Longhorn v1.10

If you do not apply the above pre-upgrade steps and the CRs are not fully migrated to `v1beta2`, the longhorn-manager Pods may fail to operate correctly. A common error message for this issue is:

```
Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
```

> To fix this issue, you need to perform a forced downgrade of Longhorn to the original v1.9.x version, which is the version that was running in your cluster before the failed upgrade. If Longhorn was installed using `kubectl`, you must patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrading. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To fix this issue, you need to perform a forced downgrade to the Longhorn version that was running before the failed upgrade (v1.9.x).

If Longhorn was installed using `kubectl`, you must patch the `current-longhorn-version` before downgrading. For example, to downgrade to v1.9.1:
```

```bash
# attaching annotation to allow patching current-longhorn-version
kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"longhorn.io/update-setting-from-longhorn":""}}}'
# temporarily override current version to allow old version installation
kubectl patch settings.longhorn.io current-longhorn-version -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"value":"v1.9.1"}'
```

After modifying `current-longhorn-version`, downgrade to the original Longhorn v1.9.x.

> For a Helm chart installation, a downgrade is allowed if [preUpgradeChecker.upgradeVersionCheck](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/tree/v1.9.x/chart#other-settings) is disabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If Longhorn was installed using Helm, downgrade is allowed with [`preUpgradeChecker.upgradeVersionCheck`](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/tree/v1.9.x/chart#other-settings) disabled.
```

backups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backuptargets.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupvolumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engineimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engines.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
instancemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
nodes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
orphans.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
recurringjobs.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

If any CR objects still exist in the system using the legacy `v1beta1` version, manual version migration must be triggered. The following script can help upgrade all objects in the system:

```bash
kubectl get validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator -o yaml >longhorn-validating-webhook.yaml
kubectl get mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator -o yaml >longhorn-mutating-webhook.yaml
kubectl delete validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator

> kubectl delete mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator

Author: Temporarily disabling webhooks is still needed. Some CRs like `stable-longhorn-versions` setting is read-only, and the validator will reject to attach the migration annotation.

> kubectl delete mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator

Reviewer: Why do we need to remove the webhooks? I

Author: Some settings CR modification will be rejected by the validator. Will change to temporary patch UPDATE validator for setting CR.

migration_time="$(date +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S)"

> crds=($(kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'))

Reviewer: Can we only collect the CRDs that have v1beta1 storedVersion?

> The `v1beta1` Longhorn API version was removed in v1.10.0. The API migration for old `v1beta1` should be done automatically. However, in certain scenarios, such as when backup system interventions occur during the Longhorn upgrade process, some Custom Resources (CRs) may still remain in the Kubernetes database using the legacy `v1beta1` version. If CR objects are not upgraded to the latest `v1beta2` version, this will prevent the Longhorn manager from functioning properly:
> 
> ```
> Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
> ```
> 
> The recommended approach is to actively verify that all `*.longhorn.io` CRDs have been upgraded to the correct version after the system upgrade is complete. All CR objects should be stored as `v1beta2`:
> 
> ```bash
> kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{": "}{.status.storedVersions}{"\n"}{end}'
> 
> backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backingimagemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backupbackingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backuptargets.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> backupvolumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> engineimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> engines.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> instancemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> nodes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> orphans.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> recurringjobs.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
> ```
> 
> If any CR objects still exist in the system using the legacy `v1beta1` version, manual version migration must be triggered. The following script can help upgrade all objects in the system:
> 
> ```bash
> kubectl get validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator -o yaml >longhorn-validating-webhook.yaml
> kubectl get mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator -o yaml >longhorn-mutating-webhook.yaml
> kubectl delete validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator
> kubectl delete mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator
> 
> migration_time="$(date +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S)"
> crds=($(kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'))
> for crd in "${crds[@]}"; do
>   echo "Migrating ${crd} ..."
>   for name in $(kubectl -n longhorn-system get "$crd" -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do
>     kubectl patch "${crd}" "${name}" -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"migration-time":"'"${migration_time}"'"}}}'
>     echo "  - $crd $name patched"
>   done
> done
> 
> kubectl apply -f longhorn-validating-webhook.yaml -f longhorn-mutating-webhook.yaml
> ```
> 
> With these steps complete, upgrading to the latest Longhorn CRDs should work well now.
> 
> For more details, see [Issue #10249](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10249).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `v1beta1` Longhorn API version was removed in v1.10.0.
```

Put the following content to a `Notice`
```
The API migration for old `v1beta1` should be done automatically. However, in certain scenarios, such as when backup system interventions occur during the Longhorn upgrade process, some Custom Resources (CRs) may still remain in the Kubernetes database using the legacy `v1beta1` version. If CR objects are not upgraded to the latest `v1beta2` version, this will prevent the Longhorn manager from functioning properly:

Upgrade failed: cannot patch "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" with kind CustomResourceDefinition: CustomResourceDefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io" is invalid: status.storedVersions[0]: Invalid value: "v1beta1": missing from spec.versions; v1beta1 was previously a storage version, and must remain in spec.versions until a storage migration ensures no data remains persisted in v1beta1 and removes v1beta1 from status.storedVersions
```

The recommended approach is to actively verify that all `*.longhorn.io` CRDs have been upgraded to the correct version after the system upgrade is complete. All CR objects should be stored as `v1beta2`:

```bash
kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{": "}{.status.storedVersions}{"\n"}{end}'

backingimagedatasources.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimagemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupbackingimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backuptargets.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
backupvolumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engineimages.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
engines.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
instancemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
nodes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
orphans.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
recurringjobs.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
replicas.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
settings.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
sharemanagers.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
snapshots.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
supportbundles.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systembackups.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
systemrestores.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumeattachments.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
volumes.longhorn.io: ["v1beta2"]
```

If any CR objects still exist in the system using the legacy `v1beta1` version, manual version migration must be triggered. The following script can help upgrade all objects in the system:

```bash
kubectl get validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator -o yaml >longhorn-validating-webhook.yaml
kubectl get mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator -o yaml >longhorn-mutating-webhook.yaml
kubectl delete validatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-validator
kubectl delete mutatingwebhookconfigurations longhorn-webhook-mutator

migration_time="$(date +%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S)"
crds=($(kubectl get crd -l app.kubernetes.io/name=longhorn -o=jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'))
for crd in "${crds[@]}"; do
  echo "Migrating ${crd} ..."
  for name in $(kubectl -n longhorn-system get "$crd" -o jsonpath='{.items[*].metadata.name}'); do
    kubectl patch "${crd}" "${name}" -n longhorn-system --type=merge -p='{"metadata":{"annotations":{"migration-time":"'"${migration_time}"'"}}}'
    echo "  - $crd $name patched"
  done
done

kubectl apply -f longhorn-validating-webhook.yaml -f longhorn-mutating-webhook.yaml
```

With these steps complete, upgrading to the latest Longhorn CRDs should work well now.

For more details, see [Issue #10249](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10249).
```
